DOC Improve performance section (#764)
silverstripe/developer-docs: en/02_Developer_Guides/08_Performance/04_Static_Publishing.md

---
title: Static Publishing

> summary: Export web pages as static HTML

Reviewer: Aww, goodbye flavour text :cry:

---

# Static publishing

Static publishing is the process of exporting website pages as static HTML files which are then served directly. This means that page content does not need to be recomputed on each request. This can have the following benefits:

- Static HTML files load much faster than dynamically generated pages as they don't require any server-side processing.

> - Static publishing reduces the load on the server, as it doesn't need to connect to the database or format templates for each request.

Reviewer: > Static publishing reduces the load on the server

This is true in general, but it also increases load for CRUD operations in the CMS which is probably worth pointing out somewhere on this page

Author: Added

> - Static publishing reduces the load on the server, as it doesn't need to connect to the database or format templates for each request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Static publishing reduces the load on the server, as it doesn't need to connect to the database or render templates for each request.
```

- Static publishing can lower hosting costs because there is less need for server resources.

> - Static publishing can improve security by reducing the attack surface of the server.

Reviewer: > Static publishing can improve security by reducing the attack surface of the server.

_can_ it? Any interactive pages (e.g. forms) wouldn't be statically cached anyway so I don't think this is really relevant.

Author: Yeah, probably only refers to 100% static sites, will remove

> [!NOTE]
> If you want to cache part of a page, or your site has interactive elements such as forms, then
> [Partial Caching](partial_caching) is more suitable.
- Static HTML files load much faster than dynamically generated pages as they don't require any server-side processing.
- Static publishing reduces the load on the server, as it doesn't need to connect to the database or format templates for each request.
- Static publishing can lower hosting costs because there is less need for server resources.
- Static publishing can improve security by reducing the attack surface of the server.

By publishing the page as HTML it's possible to run Silverstripe CMS from behind a corporate firewall, on a low performance

> server or serve millions of hits an hour without expensive hardware.

Reviewer: Why are we removing this note?

Author: Will add back in though tweaked a bit to not refer to "millions"

> On the flip side, static publishing is more complex than simply dynamically regenerating page content on every request.

Reviewer: > On the flip side, static publishing is more complex than simply dynamically regenerating page content on every request.

Give a short explanation as to why that is - all the content up until now actually makes it seem simpler. "Oh, we don't have to generate stuff every request, that must mean less is happening which means it's less complex"

Author: Done

> Static publishing is available through the [silverstripe/staticpublishqueue](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-staticpublishqueue) module.

Reviewer: We should probably promote the docs for that module to https://docs.silverstripe.org/en/6/optional_features/

Author: That would be a separate card?

Reviewer: Yup that's fair.
https://github.com/silverstripe/.github/issues/420

> Static publishing is most suitable for website content that changes infrequently and does not require dynamic interactions on every page load. Any dynamic elements will need to be separately considered.

Reviewer: What's the motivation of moving this to a section down here, instead of keeping the note above?

We should at the very least keep the "partial caching is more suitable" part of the note - but IMO it should stay up where it was, too.

Author: Added back in and added some more text to it

Reviewer: I don't think we need this as a separate section when we're keeping the note above it, which is already about dynamic data and interactive elements

Author: Have moved paragraph up and removed headings

Reviewer: Oh, you've removed the sections _below_ this... that isn't at all what I meant lol but it works.

## Using endpoints and AJAX

> For larger sites, rendering navigation menus on every page, particularly large "mega-menus" with nested pages can be challenging on statically generated websites. This is because adding or removing a page, or changing the pages navigation title means that every page on the site needs to be regenerated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For larger sites, rendering navigation menus on every page, particularly large "mega-menus" with nested pages can be challenging on statically generated websites. This is because adding or removing a page, or changing a page's navigation title means that the static file for every page on the site needs to be regenerated.
```

Author: Updated

> This can be worked around by rendering the menu HTML, or JSON with the menu data in a [`Controller`](api:SilverStripe\Control\Controller) endpoint. The return value of the endpoint can be cached using [object caching](object_caching). The frontend will then request and construct the menu using an AJAX request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be worked around by rendering the menu HTML, or JSON with the menu data with a separate endpoint. The return value of the endpoint can be cached using [object caching](object_caching). The frontend can then request and construct the menu using an AJAX request.
```

Author: Updated

> Likewise, dynamic content such as displaying personalised data for logged-in users can be shown on statically generated pages by loading that data via AJAX from an endpoint. With this sort of content you probably will not want to use object caching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Likewise, dynamic content such as displaying personalised data for logged-in users can be shown on statically generated pages by loading that data via AJAX from an endpoint and using AJAX to submit data back to the server. With this sort of content you probably will not want to use object caching.
```

Author: Updated

## Not statically generating some pages

> Some pages you simply will not want to statically generate, even though the rest of the site is statically generated. For example any pages with PHP based forms that reload the page on submission and show validation errors on them should not be statically generated. Also any pages with a large amount of dynamic content, such as a member-only section, probably should not be statically generated.

Reviewer: If I read the previous section which says "you can use AJAX to get your dynamic content" I may not then continue to read this one that warns _against_ statically generating those pages at all.

1. What dangers persist if the dynamic stuff is all dynamically loaded via AJAX?
2. Probably join this together with the previous section, maybe as a `[!WARNING]` block.

Author: Have rewritten

## Handling dynamic data

Static publishing is most suitable for website content that changes infrequently and does not require dynamic interactions on every page load. Any dynamic elements will need to be separately considered.

## Using endpoints and AJAX

For larger sites, rendering navigation menus on every page, particularly large "mega-menus" with nested pages can be challenging on statically generated websites. This is because adding or removing a page, or changing a page's navigation title means that the static file for every page on the site needs to be regenerated.

This can be worked around by rendering the menu HTML, or JSON with the menu data with a separate endpoint. The return value of the endpoint can be cached using [object caching](object_caching). The frontend can then request and construct the menu using an AJAX request.

Likewise, dynamic content such as displaying personalised data for logged-in users can be shown on statically generated pages by loading that data via AJAX from an endpoint and using AJAX to submit data back to the server. With this sort of content you probably will not want to use object caching.

> ## Excluding pages from statically generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Excluding pages from static generation
```

Author: Removed heading

> Any pages that use templates rather than AJAX requests, and contain any dynamic data or form data should be excluded from static generation. Forms that rely on templates will be reloaded on submission and any validation errors will be included in the response.

Reviewer: Isn't this just a duplication of the note that's right above the "Handling dynamic data" heading?

Author: Not quite, templates with forms on them cannot be easily converted to ajax requests, so I think this should be mentioned

Other dynamic content such as member data and mega menus are much easier to convert to ajax
